---
title: 'Lessons Learned From Publishing a React Component to npm'
date: '2018-02-26'
description:
  "I've been working on my true open source project, one that is ready for use
  in production. It's a grid system built with React components based on
  flexbox. Here's what I've learned."
tags: ['React', 'Open Source']
---

A few weeks ago I ran into a situation while working on a React project where I
wanted to have a grid system. One that was very similar to bootstrap. I knew
that there were various options already built, but I thought this would be a
great moment to create my own and release it as my first open source library.

Creating a library and publishing it to `npm` has been, up until this point, an
almost elusive task for me. I've never done it, I hadn't the slightest clue
where to start, and quite frankly I was a bit intimidated at the idea of
releasing my own code for others to use in production. That being said, I knew
that the knowledge I'd come away with after accomplishing this goal would be
extremely useful to my career and continued journey through the JavaScript
ecosystem.

So, after a few weeks of writing code, googling, and hitting roadblocks along
the way, I finally shipped v1.0.0 of
[flexomatic](https://github.com/jakewies/flexomatic), a grid system built with
`styled-components` and based on the methodology presented in
[Solved By Flexbox](https://philipwalton.github.io/solved-by-flexbox/demos/grids/).
Here are a few things I took away from the experience.

## Think about the API before writing the code

There is one thing I wish I would have done before I wrote a single line of
code, and that would be to take a pencil and some paper and write out how I, a
potential user of the library, would like the API to look.

Skipping this is totally ok. I did it, and at the end of the day I still shipped
code. But in doing so I spent a lot of wasted time going back and forth on
changes to the API design during the development process. Maybe that works for
you, but for me it felt frustrating at times.

React components can come with a lot of built-in functionality that, at the end
of the day, is just an implementation detail to the user. They are abstractions.
But there are some things that must be exposed. Ask yourself these questions:

- What props will my component accept?
- What structure will these props have?
- How will I name these props?
- Will my component need to hold on to any state?

In my opinion, the more flexible the React component the more useful it becomes.
Of course this comes with some tradeoffs. Flexibility in a React component is
great, but too flexible and your component becomes prone to bugs and unintended
use cases. These can be avoided with documentation and tests, which we'll
discuss later on.

## Use `npm link` to see your components in action

This is, without a doubt, the most useful and practical lesson you can take away
from this post. If you've never created a project with the intent to open source
it, then you probably haven't come across the `npm link` command. So, what does
it do?

`npm link` allows you to develop a component/package/module/etc. in its own
project, and simultaneously test it in another project on your computer. At
first I didn't really understand the true value in this, but when you put it in
action it's brilliant.

Accomplishing this is a straightforward two-step process. Imagine you are
working on a potential open source creation called `react-thingamuhjigger`. At
the root of this project type `npm link`. This will create a symlink in a
globally accessible `node_modules` folder that's within reach of other projects
on your computer. Next, in another project, type
`npm link react-thingamuhjigger`. This will allow you to use the React
component(s) you're working on as if you had installed it from the `npm`
registry.

I spun up a quick test project using `create-react-app` in order to test my
components without needing to worry about any configuration, but you could
easily link inside any existing React projects just as well. What's so powerful
about this is that you can develop your React components and see them update in
your test project on the fly.

## Use `jest` snapshots to test your components

I want to preface this section by saying I'm very new to testing JavaScript
applications. In fact, `jest` is the first and only testing platform I've used.
So why would I recommend it here? `jest` has an incredibly useful feature known
as **snapshot testing**. The basic idea is that `jest` will take a "snapshot" of
your React component at the time your tests run, and it will compare this
snapshot to the last one taken. The test will fail if the two snapshots don't
match.

This is useful to catch any unintended UI changes to a specific component. Of
course, if the change was intended, `jest` gives you a way to update your
snapshots. It's a really useful tool and I highly recommend messing around with
it.

## Document your components early and often

I found that writing documentation in tandem with building the components ended
up being really useful. This seems counter-intuitive at first, but opting to
document component usage during the development phase rather than pushing it to
the end of the project was easier because everything was so fresh in my mind.

Whenever I finished a feature or added the ability to handle some new use case,
I would immediately document it in my project's `README`. This created a
symbiotic relationship between writing the documentation and the actual code. I
found that doing so allowed me to identify any "holes" in the way my components
work.

I understand that this may contradict the first point I made in this post about
designing the API before writing any code, but it's worth mentioning. I did find
value here.

## Learn from others by exploring their projects

I spent _a lot_ of time snooping through other projects similar to mine, trying
to gauge how others handled configuration.

> Configuration is the bane of my existence.

Seriously. I'm sure you can agree. Sometimes trying to setup a JavaScript
project can be a pain in the ass. During a project's development cycle, I
probably spend 10% of my time writing actual code. The rest is spent googling
and configuring.

Setting up a project that will eventually be open sourced is even more of a pain
for newcomers. There is a lot I didn't know about before starting. Luckily,
GitHub makes it easy to see how other developers handle things like
configuration.

Many times I will find something I didn't know about in another project, and
after some research I'll have incorporated it into mine. But this isn't just
about configuration. It's about anything, really.

> "Programming is standing on the shoulders of giants."

I think that's the saying, isn't it? There is so much information out there. So
many examples to learn from. If you run into roadblocks trying to setup babel,
npm scripts or configure webpack, going through GitHub issues or other config
files can get you on the right path.

## Wrapping up

I hope this post has been useful to you if you're planning on jumping into the
open source arena soon. I had a blast working on this project, and learned a ton
from it. You can check it out [here](https://github.com/jakewies/flexomatic),
and feel free to reach out to me via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/jakewies) if
you have any questions. Goodluck!
