---
title: 'Puzzle Pieces'
date: '2020-04-09'
tags: ['Lessons']
---

Last night in the shower I started thinking about my current mobility program.
It's been two weeks with it. An online program I paid for. 6 days a week.
Coaching support. It's good value without a gym.

This is a change from the last few months. I had been programming my own
mobility work using knowledge I've attained over time. It was a productive few
months. I made progress in certain areas, but progress is _always_ slow. The
brain hates that.

A common theme arises a few weeks after I switch up my routine. The brain starts
asking questions:

- _Is this enough?_
- _Could we be making more progress doing something else?_
- _Are we pushing too hard?_

It's that dreaded feeling that you're not doing enough, or you're doing
something wrong altogether. I've come to think that the underlying threat is
this: **we hate the thought of wasted time**.

A pursuit requires a significant amount of your time. The quantity of which
matters as much as the quality. Time is our most precious resource. You can
never hold it for longer than a second before it slips through your fingers. You
can't get it back once it's gone. Make the most of it. We've heard these clich√©s
a million times and more. It makes sense that we feel this way.

But a pursuit is **a puzzle**. A unique puzzle made special for you, with no
instructions or time to complete.

Unfortunately you don't have all the pieces, so you go looking elsewhere. Most
of the pieces can be found for free. The internet is an incredible bucket of
puzzle pieces. All shapes and sizes.

Some you have to pay for. These are the pieces you consider to be most valuable
to your puzzle. They are the pieces _you think you need_ to finish. They might
be, but usually they aren't. If you're lucky enough you'll buy a piece that
doesn't fit at all, but instead makes you realize you had that piece all along.

Puzzles take time, and even if the piece in your hand doesn't fit, your next
choice will be that much more precise.
