---
title: 'Simplifying'
date: '2020-04-23'
tags: ['Lessons']
---

I've self-identified as someone who overcomplicates things. This is most evident
in my day job where I stare at a computer and write code. Software developers
like me tend to be too clever for their own good. That's why everything we do
gets peer reviewed before it goes into production.

I have noticed complexity creep into my physical training practice as well. This
might be strange to hear. _What's complex about training? You show up. You do
the work. You move on, right?_

To me it's an RPG. There are skills I'm working on. Each day I show up and
execute a plan to level up. The problem is when the plan becomes too ambitious.
I try chasing too many skills at once.

The first sign that complexity has found its way into my training is allocation
of time. When sessions begin to expand in timeframe, I know I've passed an
unsustainable threshold. I can keep it up for a while, but as the weeks go on my
energy levels drop. Inevitably my training suffers and I make less progress.

> _“I feel thin, sort of stretched, like butter scraped over too much bread.”_

- Bilbo Baggins

I am not able to sustain a training protocol that relies on 4-5 hours of
workload each day. There may be some people out there who can. And that's great.
But for me, I have other things that need attention.

When my mind catches wind of this, the gears start to turn. Enthusiasm to show
up each day fades. I start doubting my efforts. Consistency falls by the
wayside. It takes weeks to build a habit, and moments to break it.

## Reducing complexity in training protocols

I decided to ask myself what _reducing complexity_ in my training would look
like. There's
[an old Warren Buffet strategy](https://www.mayooshin.com/buffett-5-25-rule/) he
uses to focus and prioritize his time called **The 5/25 Strategy**. It came to
mind as I performed this thought exercise.

The first step was to write down everything I was doing and everything I wanted
to do. Then I crossed off 80% of the list. These items became my "avoid at all
costs" list. They don't get my attention until the remaining 20% have been
accomplished.

A weight was lifted off of my shoulders. It's not that the 80% percent that was
crossed off isn't priority. I want to do those things. I want to do
**everything**! But if everything is a priority, then nothing is. This is the
mindset shift I needed.

It's not a race. It's the cultivation of a lifestyle. A sustainable lifestyle.
And if I plan to do this _for life_, then what's the rush? It's better to hone
in your focus on 1 thing then lose your focus over 5 things.

I'm looking forward to what comes from this simplification mindset. To make it
actionable, I will be breaking my training up into 8-12 week periods. The goal
is unbreakable consistency. I will be _doing less_, but _accomplishing more_.
After the period is up I plan to assess my progress.

- How do I feel?
- What have I learned?
- What improved, and what didn't?

With this information I can plan the next period accordingly. Rinse. Repeat.
